So congratulations on that.
Gordon Stevenson tr Yeah, the Gordon Stevenson Trophy is,
uh, s is just rewarding.
So, uh, we leave it in your hands.
Great, thank you. So I'll, um, start.
So you, I'm the general manager
for the New Zealand Farm Environment Trust.
Um, and our mission, um, as a charity is
to champion a good farming
and growing practice, um, throughout New Zealand.
We do that primarily through our, um, flagship program,
the Balanced Farm Environment Awards, which runs
through 11 regions of New Zealand.
Um, and we are the only pan sector awards in New Zealand,
which, um, we think is a really special thing to have.
Um, our entrance go through two rounds of regional judging.
Um, and then they, um, select a regional Supreme winner.
And at that point we bring them into a national program
where we look for an ambassador for that cohort.
Um, and we then put 'em through another round of, um,
on-farm judging and then bring them into a quickfire
interview panel session.
Um, which then, um, allows us to select an ambassador
for the, um, recipient of the Gordon Stevenson Trophy,
as Sues rightly pointed out,
but also we call them our national, um,
sustainability ambassador.
And in, during this year, um, we were fortunate
to have Brendan Natural, um, be awarded with that title.
So I won't go on anymore.
I'll hand over to Brendan, um, to tell his story.
Okay. Um, just firstly, thanks very much
for giving me the opportunity for, um, to actually come down
and, and front you.
Um, you're, you're both the committees
that important a role for the country.
Um, so my name's Brendan.
I'm married to Susan, and, uh, we farm in Central Taranaki.
Um, so we're, me
and Paula are third generation, um, Jerry Farmers,
and I just like Paula to, um, do a quick introduction
and then I'll, I'll, um, I'll,
I'll go into some more detail from Erin.
Yeah. So morning everybody. Thanks for the opportunity.
Um, obviously Brendan's sister, the older,
one of the two siblings.
Um, I'm really pleased
to be here as well and support Brendan.
I have to get in while we're going, as I just like to Yeah,
yeah, yeah.
Um, yeah, so really happy to be here to support, um,
Brendan's, um, opportunity to speak with you all about
what the awards have meant and,
and, um, some thoughts about sustainability
from the farming context.
The awards are a really big deal,
have been a really big deal for our family.
So yeah, it's just like the, the, to me, this is
what we should be celebrating in New Zealand about the best
of what's going on in our rural communities
and around production and, um, farming and, um, whatnot.
So yeah, really happy to be here
and thanks for the opportunity.
Okay. So, um, third generation, um,
our farming business has been based in central Taranaki.
Um, we're both, uh, mercy graduates.
Um, I did ag, um, and postgraduate ag at MSC.
Um, Paula did, um, social working.
So we've, we started our journey being, um, mom
and dad gave us opportunity to learn
and problem solve, which is the start
of our careers, I suppose.
Um, so from an international point of view, my background,
I've worked in Europe, um, south America
and China, all in the dairy space.
Um, so I come from a quite a very broad, um, background, um,
from a New Zealand Inc.
Point of view. Um, worked for the New Zealand Dairy Board
for a 10 year period early in my career.
Um, er as a corporate farming manager, um, looking
after all the font own dairy farms in New Zealand, of which,
um, David was representing them, um, at the time.
Um, and so I've got a passion for dairy, food
and fiber, um, pastoral farming in, in, in New Zealand.
Um, and I was also regional science manager, um, in Taranaki
for DL for a six month period.
Um, so I think I've got quite a broad and unusual,
but quite a broad understanding of, um,
what's happening in the dairy space.
Um, protein production across the globe
and also in, in, um, in New Zealand.
Um, as a family, we strongly believe in science.
Um, the science will give us the solutions it has done
for 150 years in the dairy space and partial farming.
Um, and now we've got a really, um, along
with being production focused
and profit focused, sustainability has really got
to be in the forefront of what we do going forward.
Um, if we want our farms to be intergenerational
sustainability for myself and Susan,
and the family is right in the middle
of all our decision making.
It was on the outer of our business plan,
and we actually brought that right in the center.
So, um, all of our decision making is, um, sustainability,
um, fact sheet in relation to what we do and, and,
and where, where we head.
So our focus along with being profitable
and having a good level of productivity is, um,
more importantly now around sustainability
if we want our farms to be intergenerational.
Um, so as a family, there's been a number of building blocks
for us in relation to how we've got to where we are now.
So the first thing is operationally you have to be,
um, proficient.
You have to be, um, know your facts and figures.
You have to know the farm systems that you're working in.
So that the first part of my career
and running the family business was actually, um,
bolting on the tools in our toolbox.
Um, and, um,
so, so being operationally, um, savvy means profit,
sustainable farming practices, biodiversity,
nutrient sediment management, um, nutrient
and nitrogen losses, other business.
So along with being, um, proficient around
how we run the businesses.
The second thing is have a comprehensive farm plan.
Um, that's been a breakthrough for us
for the last, um, decade.
Um, we're lucky enough that Fonterra won a journey
to have a, um,
a farm plan incorporated within the sustainability journey.
Um, and so farm plans for us have meant, um,
that we've been able to,
it's been a living document we've been able to achieve, um,
some stretch targets.
Um, and we still today look at their document
and change it ultra, put stretch in there
and make sure that we're, um, you know,
we've got the farm position going forward
so it can be intergenerational.
So part of that farm plan,
celebrate the good stuff that's important.
Um, and don't sacrifice sustainability wins
for productivity gain.
I mean, everyone talks about productivity.
Um, they, they should be co-joined
and that both of 'em are important
for our businesses going forward.
Um, the second part of that, um,
platform is don't be afraid to lead.
Um, generally haven't had an issue with that.
Um, sustainability means
different things to different people.
Um, so when you're leading provincial
and Taranaki, um, around what we are doing, um, you just
surround yourself with skilled people, um, who are, uh,
focused on sustainability and champions in their field.
And that just gives you the energy to, um, keep pushing
and, and, and leading.
Um, know your numbers is critical.
Um, so if you're going to go down sustainability journey,
you're looking for light hanging fruit.
And then 10 years into our journey,
you're actually looking at the detailed stuff.
So you have to know your numbers, you have to be proficient,
um, you have to know exactly, um, the impact of changes
to your business around sustainability
and, and, and where we're heading.
Um, we, our focus is absolute, um, emissions.
Um, the, the efficiency space
that Fonterra is leading in is important right now,
right here, going forward,
we'll be judged on total emissions.
And so our business,
we're focusing on getting down total emissions.
And, um, I think over time that will be proven that
that will be the direction that the whole country will,
will, um, might take a generation,
but we need to be moving along that, um, that direction.
Um, our catchments are
under pressure across the whole country.
And it's one thing that one of the main reasons
that I wanted to support Sierra in the competition was
to put a lens on, um, the, um,
the pressure that catchments are coming under intensive,
deering intensive partial farming, um,
do does have an impact on our catchments water quality.
And, um, it's just, it's challenging, um, to sell
to our communities that, uh, for example,
look at the dairy space that, um,
so fewer families can have such a wide impact
on some of our catchments.
So we have to do better in that space.
Um, and that's one of the reasons I really wanted
to champion, um, what Sierra was doing
and putting a lens on on that.
Um, key things around our catchments around water quality,
um, sediment, um, movement and into our waters
and down through our, um, profiles, nutrient movement, um,
potassium, um, nitrogen
and, uh, phosphate and also bacteria.
Um, so they're all key drivers that at some stage, um,
at all different parts around New Zealand,
all different catchments, um, they're gonna have an impact.
So front footing, and this is part of Sarah's, um, focus
or lens for the whole country, um, is trying
to front foot the impact that, um, pastoral farming has on,
um, and our catchments.
Um, I've had a sheep,
we've got had a sheep and beef background.
Mum and dad are originally from tti,
or dad was originally from Wai or Nui.
Um, and the impact of those communities around
what they achieve around partial farming is important and,
and they've got a low, um, emissions footprint.
The absolute, they've got less levers to pull
to actually reduce the footprint than dairy.
Um, but it's important that, um, sheep and beef
and partial farming in
that space is actually protected along the lines as well
as dairy and swapping out low intensity farming
for high intensity dairy, um, and catchments.
I'm not quite sure that's a direction that communities
around New Zealand want us to follow.
So along with, um, representing dairy,
which one has a strong background in, um,
I've got a really strong association with she and beef
and their communities and their directions about
producing high quality protein.
Mm-hmm. So, in summary, um,
building blocks sustainable future, um, for food
and thrive in New Zealand is tricky.
Um, a growth and expansion model of intensive farm systems,
while it puts added pressure on a unique biodiversity
and catchments, including sediment, bacteria,
nutrient loadings into our waterways
and dealing sort profiles, it's something
that all industries are grappling with.
Um, why I realize that food
and fiber are produced on, um, our superb soils
and within our pasture based systems is
our competitive edge.
Um, it comes a point that our delicate, unique, um,
environment, um, just won't be able to actually, um,
cope with intensification on some of the catchments
and saws that we're, we're, we're working on.
Um, we're dependent now more than ever on
critical science funding, and I'm a strong follow
the science type of person.
Um, and more than ever we, we need, um, all aspects of,
um, science
and discovery to, uh, work together to identify solutions,
particularly around absolute submissions around, um,
nutrient movement and bacteria movement into our waterways.
So science funding, implementation,
and keeping our very skilled, um, science, um,
researchers in New Zealand and,
and working is very, very important.
Um, there remains a number
of low hanging fruits on all farms in New Zealand,
including ours.
The first thing is to actually achieve those,
to actually get our farmers to work towards best practice
farm plans, um, you know, Sarah's, um,
profile and, and her, um, program,
and to identify those low hanging fruits on all our farms
to make a shift on the other easy shifts.
We're gonna need science backing up
after that to get the detail right.
Farm plans are critical for our future.
They really put a lens on what we do every day, um,
how we operate and
how do we actually capture the low hanging fruit
around sustainability.
Um, so we need to shift, um,
and our, our global competitive edge is the production
of high quality protein.
We all know that. Um,
but that's gonna be intergenerational sustainable
for my son, um, and generations ahead.
Sustainability has to become a key part of, um,
our platforms going forward.
So finding a balance between protecting our environment,
supporting nature, and building world,
beating agribusinesses, um, which are intergenerational,
are the challenges ahead.
Thanks very much. Mm.
Thanks Brendan. Well,
we're gonna go straight into some questions unless Sarah
or Paul want to add anything to, alright.
I'll just make a quick comment. Miles about, um,
so Brendan's talked a lot about sustainability in the
context of farming and, and produce and whatnot.
I mean, I, I think it, we need to be, I mean,
I'm a social worker, right?
So I'm the sort of person who works with kids and families
and social problems day in and day out.
Um, and I was up in well marketing last weekend
for a fundraiser for the local school.
And that involved two big stations being opened up
and creating a 14 kilometer walking track.
That 500 people paid $60 to go
and walk across this beautiful countryside.
And the, the, the overarching impression I got from having
gone and done the walk
and, you know, watch what was going on was
sustainability is also about communities.
Mm-hmm. And using our natural resources, including our farms
and everything, our farming communities
and everything they involve, to come together
to support future generations.
And it was real, it was a fantastic example
of New Zealanders coming together in a rural context using
what they have to, to create a sense of community,
bring people together, and ultimately contribute
to the education of our future generation.
So it was awesome.
So I guess the thing I would volunteer
to the discussion today is
that sustainability is all about our farming practices
and what we're doing to protect the environment.
It's also about our communities. But yeah. Well
Said. Thank you,
Simon.
Oh, Thank you, miles. Good morning.
And thank you Brendan, a really
interesting, um, presentation.
Um, I have had the pleasure
of attending the balanced farm environment
rewards a number of times.
It's great to see the work
that farmers are doing on sustainability.
Um, I'd just like to ask you some specific questions
about practical measures that designers
of freshwater policy should be thinking about
to encourage the primary production sector along the same
journey that you've been on.
Mm-hmm. Because while we understand there's a lot
of really positive stuff happening, um,
in primary production around managing discharges from, from,
from farm activities, I,
I guess the outliers in the industry are
the ones that get all the attention.
And so I'm interested as to, as to what kind of policies
or practical measures you think policy makers should be
looking at to start, um, channeling, uh, the,
the industry in the direction that you are going in.
Yeah, so that's a, that's a really good question.
So the, um, in the short term, the compliance stuff
around effluent, that's been tied it up a lot.
Um, so if you look across the dairy sector, for example, um,
the placement, the effluent, the areas that we're applying
to the application rates, the depth of application,
there's a real focus on the regional councils now on making
sure that that's all land base
and no direct water, um, you don't discharge.
So we think as a industry,
we're actually making very
good progress in that, in that front.
Well, in my mind we are, um, we're lucky.
Regional council has got a very proactive,
um, relationship with farmers.
Um, and as a group, we've gone, um, hand in hand
with the TRC to actually achieve that on farm.
There is a lot of stuff we can do.
Um, if I had to break it down to the,
the most crucial things,
the crucial things are sediment movement, which picks up,
um, phosphate, nitrogen, and potassium.
And the second thing is, um, bacteria.
So if you looked at the dairy sector, um,
specifically the other issues that we, um,
need to, need to work on.
So the first thing is, um, we need our catchment communities
to be much stronger at the moment.
They're doing a very good job, um,
but we actually need them stronger, working harder
and connecting with more landowners that that's,
that's the first step on a farm basis.
Um, just operational stuff like, um, for example,
you know, if you've got a intensive sheep
and beef, um, set up, um, around troughs and,
and down, um, entrance way to paddocks
and down hedges, for example, there's a lot
of positive nutrients.
So, for example, applying fertilizer, um, over
and above those areas, all you're doing is intensifying the
loss fruit, salt profiles.
Mm-hmm. So stuff like, um, using technology to make sure
that you don't apply, um, PK
and nitrogen onto into, um, around waterways, around, um,
those tens of areas.
We stop, stop stock cams.
Now a good example of that for us at home, that's, um,
reduced our total nutrient, um, input by about 15%.
Um, and we've had a positive impact on our net end loss
going through our business at home.
So just be smart about where we're putting the nutrients.
Um, rip, um, charnay is a long way advanced compared
to some parts of New Zealand.
What the riparian does is stop the sediment lateral
movement, and that's what we're trying to achieve.
So, high rainfall areas where a lot
of the dairy sectors are actually operating, um,
you get rainfall atmos laterally across the soil profile,
it picks up sediment and you need a buffer.
So the rip is a, has ability to actually create that buffer.
Um, it drops the, the sediment
or stops the sediment flow, uh, reduces the speed
of the flow, um,
and make sure that when it gets to the waterways,
it's actually this, a lot of sediment's
been captured, filtered and stopped.
So keeping riperion going is, um, is, is crucial.
Um, and there's some stuff
around cows looking at our stocking rates.
Um, we are big pro promoting of reducing stocking rates.
Um, Tara's gone through, um, that,
that cow numbers have in the eighties have looked at
what we were doing in the eighties,
which was very high stocking rates, high utilization
and pasture low per cow production.
Now the industry's headed towards, um,
reducing cow numbers higher per cow production, um,
less impact on the environment in relation to, particularly
around euron spots when they deposit around nitrogen.
Um, so look at your stocking rate, trying to work on, um,
getting the, um, the production per cow up
so it can run less cows
and do the same pro um, productivity targets, um,
which then should have a flow on
of increasing profitability.
Mm. Okay. So that's, that's a, that's a crucial space.
There's a limit where that fails.
If you get down to lower stocking rate,
then you feed utilization and on-farm performance drops off.
So there's a balance that you have
to actually achieve to, to go on
Brendan. That's fantastic.
Um, one question then,
because I think you've hit pretty much
everything that I would've expected.
Yeah. Um, a sustainability advocate to hit. Yeah.
Um, do you think that the government
or councils should be telling farmers
how many cows they're allowed per hectare
and what the stocking rate should be?
Or is that something that through your farm plan,
through your catchment group, be able to identify
or, um, in, in a way that better reflects, um,
each farm situation?
In my mind, I think the, the, the first priority is
to give the individual industries the opportunity
to achieve better, uh, KPIs around sustainability.
Mm. Um, so the government supporting, um,
industry is, is very, very important.
Um, some of those industries are forward looking
and fast moving in relation to what they wanna achieve
around absolute, um, emissions.
Um, there comes a point though,
and every catchment community in New Zealand is different in
taranaki, we're very lucky, we've got very good soils, um,
where the filtration of our sediment
and, um, our nutrients through the soil profile is, um,
relatively, um, um, slow
other catchments around New Zealand.
You've got a very rapid, um, um, you know,
movement of sediment and bacteria
and also, um, nutrients through the profiles.
So some of those nutrients, I think, uh, some
of those catchments are gonna need some type of support
because we are looking back now 20 or 30 years
and some of our KPIs around, um, nitrogen
and water, um, the movement of potassium and,
and, um, phosphate,
they're actually not improving on some catchments Mm.
Some catchments are making rapid gains.
So I think, um, it's a,
it's a step-by-step process on individual catchments.
So you've got some high risk soils in New Zealand,
for example, um,
that have got intensive
farming practices happening at the moment.
Mm-hmm. And,
and those, those catchments, for example,
may need more support than the likes
of the whiteout in Taranaki, where we've got, um, you know,
quite significant process progress
around sustainable farming practices.
Yeah. Great. Thank you. So as you start on this,
Well, you've probably kind of answered it,
but thank you very much for being here,
and thank you for what you said before.
It was really interesting. You talked about the need
to strengthen our catchment communities.
Mm-hmm. And I just wondered if you had,
and you've, you've talked a little bit about it just now,
but, um, and the diverse nature of the catchment groups,
and I just wondered if you could see a role
that we could play or anything that we could do
to facilitate this from our end.
Like, okay. So the, so the single biggest industry,
which is gonna have the biggest impact on our
sustainability, um, KPIs is deer.
Okay. That's not duck shovel around that.
The, the, the, the, we are the industry
and I'm part of it that are having the single biggest impact
on, um, sustainability and,
and issues relating to water quality, et cetera, et cetera.
Okay. Um, the catchment communities are excellent.
The, the actual, um, the actual program is very, very good,
but it's not touching enough dairy farmers.
Mm. So the single biggest, um,
industry which is having the highest impact on sustainable
KPIs, um, dairy farmers in general are not, um, connecting
with, um, catchment communities.
They're trying, Tara's got one of the best, um,
communities in, in the country.
It's probably ranked in the top one
and two along with Southland.
Yeah. Yeah.
And, um, we're just struggling
to get the dairy sector involved.
So I think, um, the government's got a role to play
to actually, um, Fonterra
and all the other mill processes, open country,
some like farm plans are important.
Link those farm plans to the catchment communities, try
and get them to actually start engaging more
with the catchment communities.
'cause at some point, if we're not seeing movement on,
so you're thinking about compulsory
Involvement, Not at the start.
I think it's gotta be a industry, um,
support role that you need to play.
Um, but at some point, our wider 5 million people
are not gonna sit there
and give us a license
to farm without improvement in sustainability, um, triggers.
Um, so at some point in the future,
and you guys got the role, um, right now,
and you'll make the biggest impact
for our generation going forward.
Um, we need to see a shift.
And so getting our milk processes to, to interact
with catchment communities,
getting our catchment communities in more reconnected
with the dairy sector.
'cause that is the crucial, but at the moment
that we're, we're missing. Thank you,
Celia. Just
a up on this, and thank you very much for coming along.
It's really interesting.
Um, certainly been to Glen Eden Farms Open day when they,
they were one of the regional winners.
Um, if it's not compulsory,
and I understand that that can be quite counterproductive,
um, how can we make some useful incentives,
particularly for that sector to be involved
with their catchment collective?
Is it partly, um,
getting some extra points in some way that, um, helps them
achieve a certain standard?
Or is it that the catchment collectives
actually need a bit more funding so
that they can be more proactive?
Um, we, we've got quite a lot of catchment with community
in the ra and they're really variable has
how effective they are.
Good question. And I haven't got the answers.
I mean, from, from my, my perspective.
Um, so catchment communities, uh,
have been well funded up until last year.
Okay. They're struggling now in relation to getting funding.
Um, and they've had to go,
the NPI funding has dwindled down or stopped.
Um, and so they've had to go regionally to get funding,
um, for their programs.
And it is really hard work in the middle of a recession, um,
or near recession will come outta COVID.
Um, the ability to get regional money
for catchment communities is very, very difficult.
And they spend 30% of their time chasing money. Yeah.
It's completely crazy.
The members of that catchment community somehow getting, um,
for example, if you had a lead in a catchment community
with a dotted strong dotted line to the milk processes.
And so every program that the milk processes were doing,
there was a catchment community lens over, um, the programs
and how we can support nature.
If you can remember Fonterra looking at commercializing,
they word nature for New Zealand.
Okay. They've already got clients,
they've already got global clients around the world
that are saying, we wanna focus on nature emissions is good,
absolutely emissions is better, but actually
we want to deal with nature.
Okay. So that's the feedback they're getting now from their,
their global clients.
Okay. So Cashman communities are linking to, um,
their milk processes, um, goals and objectives
and extension plans and programs.
Um, somehow getting that, that linkage in, I'd hate
to think that, um,
you would be in putting enforcement right at the
moment over our industries.
I think you get such a, um, negative feedback from
that across our, um, pastoral based, um, food and fiber.
Um, but again, it's tricky, uh,
because we do need to see some intergenerational change
around sustainability
and KPI numbers around sediment nutrient movement, um,
and bacteria going into our waterways.
That's not gonna change
unless some real significant, um, changes to what, how we do
and what we, um, you know, what we do.
It has has to change. Yeah.
Yeah. Well, thank you for your role in supporting other
people to see some better ways of doing things.
Yeah. And you've gotta remember you're talking
to a commercial dairy farmer.
I mean, I'm system three right down the middle being a
strong supporter of our dairy industry in food and fiber
and partial farming in New Zealand.
So I'm not on the, on the left
or hard on the right of, of, um, I'm a normal dairy farming
or we're a normal dairy farming family.
Mm-hmm. Um, trying to deal with the same issues that, that,
that we're all hearing in the, in the media. Yeah.
Dave, running outta time.
So if you could make your questions sharp and to the point.
Okay. Well, first of all, congratulations
and, um, we, we often talk in at regional council level
about build curves of moving people
through their curve itself, where you've got the, uh, uh,
I suppose the leaders obviously joining.
You spoke about the Riperion program.
There's leaders there, but slowly
but surely the education,
the looking over the fences builds it into momentum.
But there's always the laggards at the end there.
And I think that's what some
of the questions are based here.
Yeah. Is, uh, what, what we can do to change from, uh,
the carrot approach of gentle, gentle to, to
what is the stick, uh, that actually gets the, the,
the remains, the ones
that generally tar the industry mm-hmm.
Of what they're actually doing.
So is there anything more you could talk
to Brenda potentially of that
Part? Yeah. Okay. Right out.
So if you take the rip period program
in Taranaki, it's time now that, um,
they've had over a decade.
Sure. Um, you actually have to enforce the bottom end, um,
and the bell curve That's right.
The bottom five 10%, they, they're lagging.
Um, so now actually we need enforcement
and the regional council taranaki and,
and for all different issues around sustainability, they,
they need to, if you've been in partnership with industry
and with individual farmers
and we're still not moving, um, unfortunately, you know,
we need some enforcement.
Um, so, so that's the, that's the first thing.
Keep in mind though, that enforcement may mean
a change in land use.
So you all need to be aware of that
because some of those family businesses are small,
they haven't got quality decision makings, um,
and they've got infrastructure that is really worn out
and they're not prepared to invest.
Mm-hmm. So the more that you push, um, the more
of those land uses will change and,
and likely they'll go out of intensive farming,
they may be sold, might be broken up
for organization and a whole lot of stuff.
So the harder you push
and further up the bell curve you go, um,
the the change in our landscape is,
is is gonna be pretty clear. Yeah.
Right. You, uh, for me, thank you very much.
Congratulations. But remember sharpen Yeah.
The, yeah, that was very quick.
The, um, the, the big, one
of the big bearers challenges is what's the acceptable level
of impact on the environment by farming sector?
This is, to me, this is the crucial thing.
What, what is the acceptable level
of nitrate levels in water?
Because there's a huge, you get different, how do we,
how do we come to that point where we can get agreement
from, you know, from those in the, in the urban
and the rural about what's acceptable so we can,
people can still run the impact on the rivers
is, uh, acceptable.
Yeah. The drinking water's accepted
and the farmers can, can still run their businesses.
That, that to me is trying to get to that point,
for example, around nitrates.
Canterbury's a classic that,
that's the toughest question for me.
That absolutely is the toughest question.
And, um, we have an impact on our environment. Yep. We do.
And it doesn't matter if we chicken, beef farming, um,
kiwi fruit vegetables.
That's right. Um, across the whole range we are farming
and we do have an impact.
Mm-hmm. Okay. I'll give you an,
I'll give you a, an idea though.
Mm-hmm. Some of our most efficient per unit emitters
have got the most highest absolute emissions.
Mm-hmm. Okay. Mm.
So at the moment, we are celebrating as an industry
per unit efficiency.
So if you've got a big intensive dairy farm system five,
doing two and a half thousand milk solids, a he deer,
they can offset all their emissions against
how much ion they're doing.
Their total absolute emissions number looked terrible.
And net end loss at home is 60, it was 180,
um, 10 years ago.
Um, some of those high intensity farming systems have got
net netting losses of 200, but we are celebrating them
because per unit of output are very efficient.
Now this, this is the big issue for the New Zealand Inc.
Because at some point per unit output efficiency KPIs
is going to fall over
because absolute emissions are not coming down as quick
as I think are your want.
Mm-hmm. Because if you want
to have an impact on our water quality, you have
to reduce total emissions.
Absolute emissions have to go down.
Net end loss needs to reduce.
Now for our own industry for Deering, a lot
of our big grantee production profitable farms, uh,
in some of those regions.
So it's a very delicate issue that we all have to manage.
Yeah. Um, look, uh, Steve meeting,
but people that don't have to go
to the house say and ask questions.
Thanks for coming along. I I see it. 11.
I really like your point around the catchment communities.
I agree with you. I think what's happened in a lot of areas,
and my, the good example is we had
so much engagement
and then fighting with regional council over what we wanted
to do as a cross section
of the community that wasn't just farmers.
We had land, uh, you know, holders, we had fishermen,
we had everyone involved,
and we came to agreement on what, uh, do.
And then we'd fight with the regional council over
what our plan of attack was because.